this is coming to you live from the  mazard family bedroom  and as soon as we had the idea to uh  just turn on the camera and start live  streaming from bed  melissa joked i guess this is the first  time we've we've made youtube video  in the bedroom  and immediately i said oh no it's not  and both of us could think of examples  now the earliest one i can remember i  said you remember the video  that joe best was so offended by i don't  even remember the topic there was a  video we filmed both of us in bathrobes  in white bathrobes in bed in a hotel  room that was in beijing china hotel  room in beijing  i think that was the first  bedroom video oh of course the whole  golden age of my youtube channel in  kunming  my bed was in the background for half of  those videos i did hundreds of videos i  think of the bed so that was in a  bedroom in front of a bed and whenever  the whenever the bed sheets were  wrinkled up i get comments from people  like i can i can tell you've been  putting work in and that bad like  no  like i've been i've been sleeping that's  all i've been doing that bit but yeah  actually um but quite a few different  videos over the history of the channel  when you made thousands of videos it's  hard to remember them all and i remember  oh no we did one game of thrones video a  video talking about game of thrones uh  with the both of us in bed so on and so  forth anyway there's this really  interesting comment remember the  audience this is from a supporter on  patreon  who just uses the initials jmj now i  only remember talking to  this viewer within the last few weeks  but this is evidently someone who's  watched the channel for many years and  this draws out i mean look part of what  he's saying here is true and it's just  interesting because it's true and then  partly i think it's kind of misleading  and wrong and that's worth talking about  or reflecting on also but it's it's  certainly a kind of stimulating and  interesting observation that he's that  he's offering  in response to my um recent kind of one  hour in-depth uh video which is titled  megan phelps roper is wrong about  everything now if you don't know who  megan phelps roper is you'd have no idea  what that video is about and also the  title um  it's kind of the opposite of clickbait  it does tell you the topic of the video  but it doesn't really give you a sense  of how profound and in-depth the  discussion is what that video gets into  so i think um that video the video that  he's responding to and then i'm going to  respond to this comment from the  audience um i think it is genuinely one  of the most profound videos on the  channel and also one of the videos of  the most pragmatic value because it's  talking about philosophy but it's time  for philosophy in a way that's applied  to your life and how you communicate  with your own parents  um how you communicate with your own  friends your own brothers and sisters  that kind of thing  how you create conflicts how you manage  conflicts once you've got them uh so on  and so forth and you know if you if you  care about politics if you care about  taking life seriously as i'm saying here  then you're going to be someone who has  a lot of conflict you know so i'm going  to read his comment i'm going to reply  to it but i'm going to hint at  what i'm really getting at in this video  by just saying i don't think we get to  choose as individuals  whether or not we have conflicts in our  life we get to choose if we're going to  have meaningful conflicts  or meaningless ones  so jmj writes in as follows  quote i watched this ted talk along with  several of her interviews her points  seemed to make sense so he's saying that  the points made by megan phelps roper  they seemed to make sense to him at the  time  you totally challenged her strategy and  i need to re-watch your video to better  grasp it  what your video does for me is that it  finally explains your years of conflict  creating with other youtubers  i remember you calling ryan from happy  healthy vegan a piece of [ __ ] and it  left me slightly horrified  i thought to myself quote  can't this guy just get along with  others close quote  so he's been watching the channel for  years  i don't know how many years ago that was  five years ago  uh  i was enjoying your videos but such  conflicts slash drama made me  uncomfortable and left me hoping it  would be the last conflict and that  peace would ensue when all the vegan  youtubers making collabs with each other  would support and promote each other etc  but then there would be conflicts with  modvegan vegan gains and over the years  numerous non-vegans as well  now i can see it's a conscious strategy  on your part to challenge people's  beliefs  to get them out of their comfort zone to  perhaps make them change their minds by  escalating a conflict  it also shows you've got a strong  personality and are used to  confrontations  i guess it's fair to say that wherever  you go you find imperfections things to  be improved and you try to change things  by creating slash participating in a  conflict you aren't the meek type of  person to compromise and just pretend to  get along  so it's a lifetime of disagreement and  conflict for you right  now both melissa and i had a lot to say  about this the moment i just read it out  loud to her in bed as we were lying down  and going to sleep  and  as described i decided to uh  get the camera set up and uh and live  stream this this commentary this  reaction  um the first thing i i disagree with  here now again obviously part of what  he's saying is right  partly it's interesting for me because  that was not on my mind at all  when i was recording the earlier video i  was not thinking about or reflecting on  my experience in those kinds of  conflicts with other vegan youtubers or  with non-vegan youtubers at all  um  so it wasn't something i was implicitly  thinking about or talking about and also  of course it wasn't what i was  explicitly uh presenting an argument  about but i do think in broad  brushstrokes he's right that this video  in case you don't understand  my modus operandi here if you don't  understand what it is i'm doing how i  engage with ideas how i engage political  conflicts and how i  how i confront other youtubers but also  mainstream political leaders you know  how i confront bernie sanders you know  anyway just say it goes far beyond the  way i address my commentary to my fellow  vegans how i address  kevin smith  um and for the record  i asked kevin smith if he would  officiate at our wedding because he does  officiate weddings i wrote to kevin  smith and said look you're vegan  we're vegan you're an atheist  we're atheists you're a youtuber i'm a  youtuber okay why don't you  officiate at our wedding  when we get married presumably in la i  don't know if we'll be in los angeles or  where we're gonna be but we're gonna get  married somewhere uh you know okay we  can have a catered vegan event  melissa and i and kevin smith if you  don't know who kevin smith is don't  bother googling it it's not important  but you know i i joked to melissa i was  like well  it's possible he'll get back in touch  with us to officiate the winning because  he does like to officiate weddings and  as mentioned he's vegan and vegan but  it's also possible he remembers my  videos criticizing him because kevin  smith does google his own name i think  he watches every single youtube video  every single podcast about him and it's  been shown he he makes fun of himself he  seems to read every  twitter comment like really obscure you  know criticism he seems to seek out and  respond and he even does mine in the  comments section on his own channel on  youtube like yeah yeah yeah so i was  like well it's possible that my harsh  honest criticism of uh of kevin smith  will  [Laughter]  he might refuse to officiate our wedding  and who knows maybe worse  maybe he'll gate crash our wedding maybe  he'll actually try to sabotage our i  don't know  um he doesn't seem like the vengeful  type but anyway yeah so  um  you know some of you might be expecting  me to just agree with this and again  partly i think oh wow what an  interesting kind of observation to take  this analysis i did was talking about  you know conflicts with your parents  with your brothers with your sisters  with your coworkers with friends with  people you care about maybe with your  university professors and talking about  the way in which politics on the most  intimate scale of those direct personal  relationships how it does and doesn't  relate to the grandiose scale of the  fate of nations  shall we say that was really what was on  my mind the video to look at that and  then say oh you can use this as an  analysis of what's been happening in the  last five years the last eight years on  the abella seal youtube channel now this  is the first thing i react to kind of  negatively where i say oh no this is  this is off base so you don't you don't  quite get it obviously this guy is the  best of intentions i'm not describing  better than you said but  he's partly right he's probably wrong  where he says quote i guess it's fair to  say  that wherever you go you find  imperfections comma things to be  improved and you try to change things by  creating or participating in a conflict  period  now that makes me think of somebody who  works in architecture or interior decor  you know kind of walking around looking  at the brick work  looking at the ceiling looking at the  you know looking at the paintings of  well you know this could be improved  well you know uh the drapes don't really  match the carpet no pun intended you  know i feel like to be to be walking  around finding fault with uh the  furniture you know this this table it  just doesn't go with  this is the image that comes to my mind  when i think of uh somebody who finds  imperfections everywhere and by the way  i mean it was partly his job but my  father was a little bit like that  my father could walk around a museum and  he could notice the problems with the  lighting  you know  very technical things the lighting is  not correct um  you know  okay so you know this is a certain kind  of personality that's not who i am at  all like neither on camera nor off  camera and it's certainly not what i do  as a creative artist as a filmmaker as a  youtuber as a broadcaster as a kind of  radio talk show host you know i mean my  role resembles each of these things to  to some extent um  when i see  a self-professed science channel like a  natural vegan someone who identifies as  doing a science education show as being  an advocate for science and rationality  i see a science youtuber  promoting the notion that you can and  should take antidepressants during  pregnancy  this is someone who in the past made  youtube videos talking about the health  effects  of  uh  nutrasweet  and splenda artificial sweeteners this  is someone who apparently  allegedly or ostensibly did the research  and then presents you with the  hard-hitting facts about the science  behind  nutrition  organic farming and  different kinds of uh sugar substitutes  that's that's how she identifies that so  she presents now anyone in this audience  could throw in an avalanche of sarcastic  comments well yeah that's that's a small  percentage of what she does who she  really isn't she's really about if  that's that is ostensibly it's not  actually who she is on youtube  and she's saying it's fine for one thing  she's saying it's fine to take  antidepressants period then she's saying  it's fine to take antidepressants during  pregnancy that's not an imperfection i'm  finding i'm not walking around a palace  and finding cracks in the cement and  saying that the the drapes don't match  the carpet or the style of the furniture  doesn't match the pool something  no okay  there's a really clear fissure here  between right and wrong good and evil  and in her own idiom because she's a  consequentialist  this has consequences this is gonna harm  people this is going to make the world a  worse place and it's going to directly  impact  people's lives right this is not you  know now now again sorry i'm not  offended by it  but when he describes me as a person  who is creating conflict or  participating in conflict and that it's  a life of uh  disagreement you know for me of finding  finding fault  so did i create that conflict and i'm  saying no like sincerely like i'm really  asking the question  you know how do you describe my role  in that  you know i'm telling the truth  and it's not trivial and i'm not finding  fault and it's not an imperfection and  i'm not even saying you can improve she  can't  you know there's no possibility of her  trying to group i'm trying to save  people's lives  and i'm really trying to challenge  the  ethical compromises that define the  culture and society and the epoch that i  live in  and i'm saying to people again again  don't compromise don't lie to yourself  don't lie to others don't don't live a  lie there's a price and you know yeah  sure in the most extreme cases the price  is the difference between life and death  but more often  it's going to be a loss of your personal  integrity  right it's going to be a life without  integrity being contrasted to a life  that does have integrity now you know  this is not the only  example  there are myriad throughout the whole uh  history of the of the youtube channel  um  a conflict that i created you can put it  this way is that there was at the time a  well-known and successful  fitness youtuber a guy who talked about  weight loss and muscle again he was a  male bodybuilder  and the vast majority of people who  watched this channel had no idea about  his connection to neo-nazi ideology had  no idea about his connection to racism  and far-right ideology and he was  friends with  based on what was told both by him and  by richard he was friends with vegan  gaines aka richard despite the fact that  he was an overt  racist white supremacist in this way and  i put together the videos that demolish  his reputation and i think it's fair to  say they they ended his career  i've heard that back from many different  people from many different quarters  and richard continued to support him and  continue to promote him even after he  was outed  in this way now you know again sir this  is not something you know if any of you  haven't seen those videos you can go  back and watch them but i mean you know  the details are not so relevant this is  not something small this is not subtle  there's not finding a crack or or  fissure you know it's it's  you know what what can i say you know  all i had to do was use quotations of  this guy put them together in a video  people requested that i he then deleted  all these videos from his own channels  plural and actually got requests to put  it up unedited to have them speaking or  without any edits  and i did that among the people who  request that was richard vegan gains he  said that you know obviously the other  side so the other guy was like oh no no  like isil misrepresented me by using  like little clips of the condos i know i  didn't  so i remember even richard wanted to see  the whole thing uh unedited and so on  not that there was just one video in  questions guys many many videos and um  his girlfriend  fiance of the time  she was also involved in this far-right  racist ideology  so you know when i made videos  really tackling those people really  confronting those those people and  exposing them for what they were i can't  i can't describe this as  you know finding imperfections  neither with people nor with  politics or ideas these are  major serious  you know political challenges of our  time  and now not everybody can do what i do  they have to ask question  if not you  then who  you know if if i'm not going to do it  and with any of these i'm sorry was  there someone else who was going to take  on a natural beacon on the issue of  antidepressants and brain damage being  caused by antibodies was there someone  else who was going to take on jacqueline  glenn and mike the vegan about the issue  of  marijuana  and brain damage being caused by  marijuana and the scientific evidence  that i i know  mike the vegan saw my critique because i  heard back from him i know jacqueline  glenn heard my critique because i heard  back from her right so i know that  critique reached those people and  reached thousands of other people in the  audience this is not finding a minor  imperfection so another example be the  ayahuasca um  fad  you know i have a very hard anti-drug  position and all these issues and i  really went after and seriously  criticized people who were glorifying  and promoting the use of ayahuasca so  i'm not walking around some beautiful  palace finding fault with the the the  decorations right here's the other thing  this this is going to sound simple  but it's deep  um  it's shallow and it's deep at the same  damn time as i used to say  you know  if your brother  is a drunk  if your brother is descending further  and further  into alcoholism  for the sake of iron let's presume  you're both adults  you only see him every so often  you see him at thanksgiving and  [Laughter]  you see him on certain kinds of holidays  and occasions once every couple of  months  you know  you're gonna be encouraging  to your brother  you're gonna be tolerant  to your brother are you gonna take the  attitude that if your brother just keeps  on drinking if he keeps on going further  down this spiral  it doesn't hurt you  it doesn't it doesn't hurt me doesn't  ruin my life  why should i even be rude why should i  ruffle any feathers why should i  interrupt  why should i stand up or get out of line  right if he if he drinks himself to  death if he ruins his life if he  squanders his intellectual potential  uh being a drunk you know okay it's very  easy to say  it doesn't hurt me  if you get drunk  if you're an alcoholic and you know what  it's much harder to say it does hurt me  as the old song lyric goes  when things go wrong  go wrong with you  don't you know  it hurts me too  it's so much harder and it's so much  realer to say to your brother  can't you see it's hurting me  can't you see it's chewing me up inside  can't you see how terrible i feel  because you are an alcoholic  because you're drinking this way because  you're ruining your life  now  it's not going to ruin my life you know  your brain damage is not my brain damage  your diarrhea is not my diarrhea your  vomiting is not my vomiting and your  death is not my death  of course  you know  um  but you know to say to someone  you know  it breaks my heart  to see you squandering your intellectual  potential this way it breaks my heart to  see you  taking everything good about this life  and throwing it away and flushing it on  the toilet for the sake of a jug of  whiskey or you know whatever his poison  may be  now  well you know what kind of person  takes option a and what kind of person  takes option b  a lot of us  grow up  with this false ideology of tolerance  that what you ought to do in relation to  all these human vices is is tolerate  them oh we can all get along and your  your brother can go gambling every  weekend and and drink whiskey every  wednesday or whatever drinks vodka on  mondays and whiskey on wednesdays or you  know whatever you know your brother can  be a drunk and an alcoholic and that you  should just ignore it and smooth things  over and get along with him and be kind  and encouraging to everyone everyone  should tolerate everyone else's vices  and together we can all go to hell in a  hand basket  you know like society can go to hell  with nobody taking responsibility for  anyone else nobody caring about the  consequences of anyone else's  actions  you know  like as if i'm just gonna paint my own  side of the fence  and it doesn't matter if my brother is  ruining the other side of the fence well  it's the same fence  and my brother screws up the paint job  i'm gonna have to do it again you know  i'm sorry but it's the it's the most i  was in the world but i mean  the judgment is ultimately  on what kind of person i'm going to be i  don't get to choose what kind of person  my brother is going to be now  i think the type of person who embraces  that fundamentally libertarian  fundamentally interco-capitalist view of  the world  that you should just let people drink  themselves to death let people become  drug addicts i mean really that's  bedrock for both libertarianism and  integral capitalism  they want to decriminalize  heroin cocaine everything and let let  everybody kill themselves you know that  it just it shouldn't matter to you  anyway okay well that that's one type of  person and i'm telling you  that's not me  you know i care  and in a sense i care because i don't  think i'm that special  you know what i mean  i got a lot of brothers okay one of my  brothers is so severely mentally  [ __ ] that he's never spoken a word  in any language he never learned to  speak english you never learned his  beginning language i've studied a few  languages all right you know so i do  have one brother severely uh mentally  disabled but  you know if you're looking around at my  brothers and sisters  you know  how much difference in intellectual  potential is there between us like  genetically or something like in terms  of how we were how we were born  well i can tell you something all they  might as well be [ __ ] compared to me  now  because of how they live their lives  because of the consequences of the the  decisions they've made right they're all  older than me talking about guys 15  years old  had a lot more years to develop  themselves you know okay you know now  look it's not my decision to make you  know it's i don't have to live with the  consequence i don't right  the decision i can make is just whether  or not i care the decision i'm gonna  make is of my own attitude and i'm  saying yeah you're a better person if  you can reach out to your brother  and say  you know it hurts me so much  to see you drinking this way and you  know what i don't feel like a bad person  when i reach out to  a natural vegan  and say it hurts me so much  to see you embracing pseudoscience this  way  it hurts me so much you're a you're a  science broadcaster or science education  youtuber and you have in the past  researched things and debunked things  and taken risks you know like you know  taking an edgy position on organic  farming and about uh  artificial sweeteners  and it really hurts me to see you doing  the wrong thing and the worst part of  all is one  i know you're giving yourself brain  damage two i know you're giving your  unborn child brain damage  now the child's born she's taking these  drugs during pregnancy doing harm to the  fetus doing harm to the embryo whatever  i say  you know and three  i know  with an audience the size of our  audience this has consequences there are  going to be other women who embrace  these excuses you're propounding at  least as certainly as promoting  cigarettes marijuana  drugs or alcohol to say look it hurts me  too  you know i'm affected i care  you know  you know so so so what is that are you  gonna say that's a more compassionate  person a more conservative you know look  what you can characterize this you know  in in different ways but i can't  characterize it as someone who's walking  around finding imperfections you know i  don't i don't think that's  i don't think that's what i'm doing and  either a deep or  or a shallow level here  now  look  um  when i reached out to  aaron janus  when i reached out to vegan gains  richard  and when i criticized them  all right  um  and you know jacqueline glenn she's an  example this too  part of what i'm saying to these people  is  you have  an amazing opportunity  and you're squandering it  you know  um  i think i've said that in those exact  terms  publicly and privately to all three of  those people  you know  you know and you don't know how long  it's gonna last i mean maybe for aaron  it's already over  maybe for richard it's already over now  too but for some number of years you had  this amazing opportunity and yeah sure  it's an opportunity to get a certain  message out to an audience  it's an opportunity as a as a creative  artist but of course it's also an  opportunity to become a better person  instead of a worse one right  now  you can say i'm creating conflict or i'm  escalating conflict from my perspective  in all these cases i'm acting with real  concern and let's let's be real to my  knowledge  all three of those people they were  really emotionally hurt by what i did  and  richard can do this tough guy act  um i think it's fair to say that both  richard and his wife they were really  hurt by the by the critique i directed  against  and whatever i mean  frankly i mean you know this is this is  certainly non-falsifiable because  richard he pretends to be this tough guy  if he comes out and says on camera uh  know that i i it didn't hurt him anyway  i'm sorry i wouldn't i wouldn't believe  him and you know whatever i've i have i  have the the evidence i have before my  eyes in terms of how they how they  reacted to it inasmuch as richard is  capable of feeling pain you know i think  it did i think it really did hurt right  but i am asking  a really important question that has  really important consequences to him and  frankly it's very close to  being disappointed that your brother has  become an alcoholic or your brother has  become a gambler it's like look richard  you really could have done something  great  with this i'll just mention to me like  one example  that i know i talked about with richard  directly back today it's like well you  know richard  part of what you like to do  is read these scientific publications  i can remember him even reading uh  autopsies you know kind of medical  reports on particulars part of what you  like to do is analyze these statistics  i i have some university education that  he doesn't  but you know you don't really have the  background or education in this you  could take this interest you could  develop it  i suggested different kinds of  university courses he could take  whatever but you know he could build on  that interest in  the health sciences social sciences  pardon me social science statistics you  could take that you could move forward  with it you know  now  i'm being real with you  sure in some small part that's about how  you inform the audience how you change  the world the future of the vegan  movement  but for richard  99 of it  if like from my perspective and why i'm  saying that dan is about  five years from now what kind of man are  you going to be  who are you going to become  right when i'm talking to richard  about not playing video games which is  something back when we were friends i  talked to him about now of course i've  said it publicly and so on you know  [Laughter]  that's zero percent about the audience i  don't want to be i don't care like it's  not like he has to present an image of  of moral purity for his audience it's a  hundred percent about what kind of  person you're going to be five years  from now and let me ask you straight up  in any of those three cases  what if five years ago jacqueline  glennon had followed my advice what if  five years ago aaron janus had followed  my advice what if five years ago  vegan gains had followed my voice these  would all be really really different  people and are really profound and  meaningful and important way  so  you know this stuff it really is  sincerely motivated  and it's not just trying to make the  world a better place and it's not trying  to score points it's not trying to  create a conflict in a demonstrative way  for the audience  a lot of it is really about actually  trying to make that particular person  yeah give them the opportunity  to question the decisions they've made  the compromises they've made  and uh and to become a better person to  start making the right decisions start  making different decisions  and yeah you know so now the the side of  the equation that jmj is correct about  this writer this remember the audience  writing it what he's writing about is  it's certainly true that i do appreciate  that you need a kind of  jarring distantiation  [Laughter]  that most people  are not really going to stop  and  reconsider their drinking habit  without a fairly jarring distantiation  where suddenly something happens  where they stop and look in the mirror  or reconsider you know i've known so  many people who drink alcohol and if  they're ever challenged on it in any  kind they'll just say oh well i drink  half as much as my boss at work oh you  think i drink a lot you should see my  brother toby he drinks more than they  just have these relativistic  justifications of well i know someone  else oh you think i gamble a lot oh the  other guy is down there so i know guys  who gamble twice as much  you know i mean it's so easy for people  to relativize these things and and  justify them and oh well if if you think  i'm wasting my life by playing video  games  uh on the internet all the time and live  streaming myself playing video games you  know and then they justify it by  comparing to someone else who's wasting  their life  even more and you know  you know yes i do think that  there's this very deep gulf in the world  between people who are taking life  seriously  and people who never have  and just to get someone to stop and  reconsider  how would i be living my life now  if i took it seriously so digress you're  still really brief and good about this i  remember i once heard about a distant  cousin of mine now i'm being i don't  even know if i'm related to this guy by  blood someone who's called a cousin of  mine but we're either barely related or  or not at all it's just some kind of  family connection through something  but  disney i've never met the guy i've never  talked to  and you know  um  he attempted suicide he threw himself  out a window  and ended up in a wheelchair for the  rest of his life so he survived falling  out of a window but he was in a in a  wheelchair throughout his life that's  the story as it was told to me i said i  never i never met the guy and i just  really thought about  you know if i were in a wheelchair  you know what would i do with the rest  of my life and  you guys know video games are part of my  childhood part of my teenage years too  and it's just so clear it's like well on  the one hand you can sink into self-pity  and you can be an alcoholic in a  wheelchair you know you know you can you  can drink you can play video games you  can feel sorry for yourself or you know  you can just be completely resolute and  self-disciplined and realize that the  life of the mind that what really  matters in politics and philosophy and  all these things you know that's still  there for you the real work is there to  be done on this and i sat there and  thought about that for a few minutes  and then of course i looked at the life  i was living like here and now the life  i was living at that time  and i realized how much worse the life i  was living was compared to how i  imagined myself living if i had an  accident i was confined to a wheelchair  for the rest of my life it's like wow  i'm not living up to the standards i  would have for myself  for being a good person or being  adequate if i were  disabled and confined to a wheelchair  like  you know and you know you start you know  you have to be self-critical you have to  think well why am i so lazy or why am i  well what what even you have to think  what are the excuses i'm making for  myself that i didn't even realize i was  making you know  um i talked to someone recently i'm not  going to say this is i talked to someone  recently who who had a um  a near-death experience he was  hospitalized and almost died and i  talked about  some similar experiences had in my own  life and talked about the difference  between how you feel about it now other  people know i feel about it because  other people see you in a hospital bed  and they attribute things to it and  maybe maybe you don't feel that way  about it but the other people i feel  you know um  you know  for most people who drink alcohol  the problem is invisible  they can't perceive the problem to them  it's a non-problem for most people who  eat meat and drink milk and eat yogurt  it's a non-problem they think veganism  is the problem they don't see they don't  see um their own diet or their own  ethical choices and their consequences  you know as as the problem so i mean  certainly funny if you're willing to get  involved in vegan politics you are  presumably  already committed to getting involved  with the the politics of confronting  people in a jarring and distantiating  way  about their own ethical choices  and specifically about ethical choices  that they are  blind to the significance of that they  are self-selectingly blind that they  they choose to be ignorant at the  consequences so now you know vegan  politics on one  it's only one of many political irons i  have the fire it's only one of many  political  you know interests i have um  [Music]  you know  but i mean it's a very interesting sort  of challenge here that jmj presents to  me but what i feel like  saying in reply is why doesn't everyone  else live this way why doesn't everyone  else live the way i do why aren't you  reaching out to your brother  and and saying  you know it hurts me so much  to see you squandering your intellectual  potential this way all right and why  doesn't everyone who knows richard knows  vegan gains reach out to him and say  it's basically the same thing it hurts  me so much to see you squandering your  intellectual potential this way yeah now  you've got money now you've got fame i  mean it doesn't have to worry about  paying his rent so so on you know and  this is what you're doing with your life  you should have greater ambitions and  again i'm being honest for me  you know i can't say he he he must have  ambitions  to lead the vegan movement or he must  have ambitions to to politically make a  difference in canada  and you guys might not have noticed this  i never say on my channel that you you  and you in the audience you must have  political ambitions to make cambodia a  better place or myanmar a better place  or  kazakhstan or kurdistan i talk about  politics from all around the world i'm  not gonna say you know i didn't say to  richard look richard you have to go to  syria and help  refugees in the syrian civil war i don't  say that right  i mean i do think on a bedrock level on  an inescapable level  your commitment  really has to be  to this idea of who you are going to be  who are you going to be five years from  now  who are you going to be 10 years from  now 20 years from now when you're 65  years old when you're 75 years old now  i'm gonna make the recklessly optimistic  statement that once you're thinking that  way  once you're really committed to being to  that that better person you could be  that's when it starts to become  thinkable  maybe you should care more about syria  maybe you should care more about myanmar  maybe you should care more about  cambodia or kazakhstan or kyrgyzstan or  you know maybe your your ambitions to  make the world a better place it starts  to go far beyond your own alcoholic  brother  who's just one alcoholic perhaps to be  your brother maybe you care about about  helping other people you know in other  ways also so we'll come back to it's  already in the title of this video you  know the most fundamental light motif  here  is that there is this fissure there's  this deep divider cleavage between  people who take life seriously and  people who don't  and you know i mean so someone like  richard is a very strange example  someone like aaron janis first example  when you talk about vegans and vegan  activists and vegan personalities you're  talking about people who found one thing  in life they take really seriously james  aspie james aspie he takes veganism  really seriously everything else in life  apparently doesn't you know  well you know i take life seriously like  this matters to me i can't say to you it  makes no difference to me if you're an  alcoholic i can't say i don't care just  because that doesn't harm me it it does  matter you know  um  you know when you take life seriously  if you see  young people  lying  about the history of communism  and converting other people to communism  and  building a new communist movement  whether it's in the united states of  america or in taiwan or in europe or  what have you  and you're in a position you're a  position like myself where you already  have many years of research many years  of reading many years of expertise  including the experience of living in  communist countries i have all kinds of  i have all kinds of ability to debunk  that  you know  um  what would my attitude be what would it  say about me  if i lived my life just just being well  i don't care like as if  you know the only point is for us to  tolerate each other as if it does me no  harm and it's no concern of mine  if you you and you  should be communists or indeed if  high-profile famous influential and  powerful people on youtube and in the  world should be dragging other people  into a revival of  of communist ideology of course i care  about that  of course i should i should oppose it  and again let me just ask if not you  then who  i mean if i'm not going to speak out  against communism if i'm not going to  speak out against fascism if i'm not  going to speak out on first nations  politics you know i have this history  linking me to the study of korean ojibwe  indigenous people in canada first  nations american indians  if i'm not gonna do that i can even ask  people to ask you are you are you gonna  stand up or you just stick with your  your neck on those issues  now  one of the examples here  this may seem  trivial but i think it it illustrates  this this deepest divide  you know which isn't attached to any  particular issue it isn't attached to  communism and it isn't attached to  alcohol versus sobriety it isn't  attached to misinformation about  antidepressants versus the horrifying  real science and so  the example mentioned by jmj is  happy healthy vegan right  okay  why did i confront  happy healthy vegan  in the way that i did sorry am i getting  to know ryan yeah that's that's the  channel name  you know  okay  you know  i have i had i think just one debate  with a communist on my youtube channel  if there have been a second or third  that weren't that memorable i've talked  to others online  but you go  of course it hurts me  to hear someone  to meet someone who's throwing their  life away who's ruining their life for  this religion  this ideology that might as well be  religion the set of political beliefs  um  [Music]  you know but it's a it's specifically a  political ideology that ruined my own  father's life  okay  now whatever my father could have been  he wasn't because of communism all right  let's let's put it that way  and i mean my father would never be able  to be honest with you about any of this  stuff  there was a stage at which my father was  an aspiring actor  in a shakespearean festival okay  there was a stage at which my father  applied for and received a scholarship  to study hinduism  okay study hindu philosophy not  communist philosophy not  not marxism  you know  now  there is not a lot good about my father  he's a terrible person already in that  period i could tell you terrible things  about him terrible things he did that a  terrible consequence a lot of bad things  about my father but whatever positive  potentially had to do good in the world  it was snuffed out  you could say by his being seduced by  communism or his commitment to communism  but really it is like a religious  conversion for him  and he tried to raise me as his son he  tried to raise me in the same religion  that he had become committed to himself  what kind of person would i be  if i just stumbled through life and  tolerated in this sense  other people becoming victims of this  same ideology other people converting to  this religion when i know  the harm it does and i really know and  understand you know the ideology itself  i understand it from the inside and from  the outside i understand it  from many different angles but like i  even understand emotionally what people  find compelling about it you know not  just the dry textbook facts of history  or something a lot of different angles i  have okay  you know  why wouldn't i be concerned why wouldn't  i care even if you're not my brother you  know even if you're a complete stranger  on the internet now you know i can't  care about everyone there are limits to  how much you can care and that's a  that's a subject for another video  and again if not you if not you then who  you know  if you're taking life  seriously  you really care about the future of the  vegan movement  and you know and understand what i know  about the future of the being movement  isn't there a similar kind of motivation  in intervening and confronting people  when you see them doing the wrong thing  and taking the wrong path  in the vegan movement  and when you know you even know they  have good intentions  you know you know they have good  intentions but you know to some extent  they're ruining their own lives to some  extent they're ruining the movement and  you want to  there are many examples of that sure  ryan from happy ltv can i mention here  because it's partly applicable that case  i think a great example is my  confrontation with cranky vegan so if  you guys don't know who cranky vegan is  that guy i really had to say to him look  you don't seem to hear the words that  are coming out of your own mouth but  this is what you're saying in these  videos you know this is going to have  consequences for people it's going to  have constant individual it's going to  have consequences for individual people  and their individual lives going to jail  and it's also going to have consequences  for the movement and as a consequence  for you like you know um but you know  that's a very pure example where it's  about the future of the movement and  none of you may believe me but my  conflict with nina miranda  that is was legitimately about  contesting the future of the vegan move  and i know nina and miranda they think  they only have good intentions i mean  still to this day they think they've  done nothing wrong or  they keep up the pretense you know but  no i really had something important to  say and i know it got to them because  they responded to it and i know it got  too close  you know close was there from  plant-based news i know what got to  vegan cheetah also it was pointing the  finger at those  five people or something saying look  you know  you may not think you're doing something  here  um  that's bad and evil and wrong but i'm  gonna really explain to you what's going  on in the movement  and i'm sorry guys you can look back at  the last eight years  i wish i could sit here and tell you  that i was wrong  i wish i could sit here and tell you  that my you know when you look back  my critique of gary yourofsky my  critique of gary francione my critique  of nina miranda my critique of of any of  these people  you know  i was  really setting out the right warnings at  the right time and in any of those cases  even  someone like gary yourofsky what if five  years ago gary yourofsky had listened to  and taken my advice how different would  his life be how different would the  whole vegan movement be james asked me  what if five years ago he'd listen to my  critique and you know  any of these people down to including  joey carbstrong or something like the  advice i gave it was really needed it  was really necessary it could really  change the path these people were taking  life and then the knock-on effects  they've had for all the people they've  they've influenced and the harm they've  done in the movement and then again what  the movement could have been you know  but sure in the same way that i can say  we'll never know the man my father could  have become  if he didn't become the victim of an  evil ideology and to be fair if he  didn't become himself an evil idiot  because he did harm to others i mean he  wasn't a passive victim  he you know  he was himself um  he was himself one of the uh  one of the people using this ideology to  harm others let's put it that way you  know well you can say the same thing  about what happened within veganism in  the last eight years yes that's  simplifying a complicated story but it's  a still a reasonable simplification so  wouldn't you feel motivated  to intervene and make that change if you  could if you have that background  and in terms of the conflict with ryan  specifically with happy healthy vegan  do you have any idea  what depth of expertise and experience i  have with buddhism  it's a legitimate question like  in terms of both how much i know  and the scarcity of that knowledge the  number of white people who speak english  who have ever  known more about buddhism than me in the  in the history of the world like you're  talking about teravata buddhism orthodox  pali canon  theravada buddhism i wish i could tell  you there were just tons of people you  could talk to about this stuff but one  there were incredibly few people who did  the work did the research and two  most of them are insane  and like not a little bit and say not  slightly eccentric  so you know i'm someone who actually has  sane rational skeptical attitudes and  who's done the research and studied the  languages and lived in those countries  now  okay so if you have no again these are  just parallels if you have my background  and my understanding about  antidepressant drugs  what are you gonna do about it don't you  feel there's an onus on you don't i feel  pressure sorry i said don't i feel  pressure but let me just tell you  possibly i feel pressure to take what i  know  about antidepressant drugs and go out  and change the world and go out and  challenge  the inertia and indifference and  ignorance  of the society and culture i'm living in  i don't know what to do with that it's a  burden on me that i live with i feel an  onus on me i feel a burden on me because  of what i know about communism  to go out and debunk  communism to go and challenge the  evolving and expanding culture of  communism in our times you know i feel  motivated to go out  and try to make the difference that i  can make in some cases it's the  difference that i alone can make in some  cases the difference where there are a  few other people in the world but  apparently none of them are motivated  like i don't have competition in these  any of these fields of uh  of human endeavor  and sure you know um  it's very strange  for me to be sitting there and talking  about buddhism  with someone like ryan from happy  healthy vegan  and  you know if you know  what i know about buddhism  and you take life  seriously  how do you feel  when you see sam harris  a leader in the atheist movement  peddling and promoting buddhist  meditation  peddling and promoting specific forms of  buddhism  you know  bad things about you know the dirt about  i know things about buddhism not just  generally but specifically you know the  specific speakers sam harris is having  in the specific lie as sam harris  himself is telling or that he and his  his guest  doing the interview are telling i know  the harm it does in the same way that i  know the harm i know the danger  of uh of communism  and in the same way i think it's fair to  say now looking back at last five years  looking like back in the last eight  years  it's fair to say that i knew the harm of  what was going on in the vegan movement  of what was going wrong with veganism  and of the tremendous positive  opportunities that were squandered you  know like tragically  you know i thought i knew that  tragically i was right  so he says just gonna read this and wrap  it up  quote  but then there would be conflicts with  mod vegan vegan gains and over the years  numerous non-vegans as well  now i can see it as a conscious strategy  on your part to challenge people's  beliefs  to get them out of their comfort zone  perhaps to make them change their minds  by escalating a conflict  um  i feel like there's a kind of objective  reality to what he's saying there like  it's objectively true from his  perspective sitting on the audience  and yet for me subjectively  it's totally untrue  i tried so hard to get along with  richard  vegan  i tried so hard to get along with  margaret  modvegan  you know  do you think  lying  about cocaine  and heroin and you know  what's now the fentanyl  drug addiction epidemic run out of  control the specific lies  she was telling  about drugs  and you know i know  she was also committed to that kind of  position on on antidepressants i mean  it's not surprising if you're wanting to  tell those lies in favor of cocaine  you're going to tell them how much  easier to tell them in favor of  of antidepressants  [Music]  you know  i tried so hard  to work with these people  not against them and of course aaron  janus is an example i tried so hard to  get along with aaron janice i tried so  hard to get along with henia penumania i  tried so hard to cooperate with people  and to see the good in them  and modvegan had sent me a long series  of completely insane  completely dishonest completely  despicable statements in writing  related to the drug addiction issue hard  drug issue what i want to say  and i invited her to come on  the podcast and have a discussion about  it to say it was in good faith is an  understatement  i really wanted to assume the best about  her i knew okay this is what she did her  master's degree research on i wanted  that to be a positive  cooperative collaborative discussion  like that really was my perspective so  i'm just saying like you're saying this  is an intentional strategy  and i think like it's totally fair from  someone for someone in the audience to  sit there and you can watch that live  stream i did with mod vegan  you can sit there and watch that  and you you could objectively say oh  well this is isil intentionally  escalating the conflict and so on and  i've got to say for me  living through the first person not at  all  not at all  it's me i went into that  really genuinely  and even during that conversation i feel  i'm de-escalating the confidence and i'm  letting her get away with things there's  flagrantly false and dishonest about you  and  you know and i'm from my perspective  i've been trying to be kind and  encouraging and and see the best in  people  and  for so many years i was trying to build  a movement while recognizing that  each person was an eccentric  with  you know mutually irreconcilable values  separating them from every other  eccentric who had some  uh potential  to contribute something positive whether  that was to the future of the vegan  movement or the future of the atheist  movement or the future of the democracy  movement if i can think of myself as  being now an activist for for direct  democracy or for some kind of return to  what it was that managed to get right in  uh in ancient greece and realm  which i do as i get older now i don't  think of myself more and more as a as an  activist in that sense i cannot say a  classicist because that word  has other meanings  and connotations and denotations but  yeah i'd be very interested in working  with people  um who share that kind of interest that  kind of vision of the past  and that kind of vision of  the future  um deepening and  making making democracy meaningful  i'm tempted to say making democracy  great again but  but no it really is it really is a  vision of the future and not uh  not about glorifying the past  okay guys um  he closes his comment by saying um  you know it's a conscious strategy on my  part and that therefore quote  as i'm quoting him he says quote i guess  it's fair to say that wherever you go  you find imperfections  you aren't  sorry it shows that you have a strong  character he says you aren't the meek  type of person to compromise and pretend  just to get along so  therefore it's a lifetime of  disagreement and conflict for you right  well let me ask you in the audience this  question  if you were living in saudi arabia  how much conflict would you have  with the culture you happen to be  living in you having to be situated for  you happen to be born into if in a  different life you were born in saudi  arabia if in a different life you were  born in istanbul  turkey very interesting example right  now because it's sort of teetering on  the edge  um it's not as bad as saudi arabia yet  but it's gotten worse and worse within  my lifetime you know  or perhaps to be fair or perhaps yeah i  mean sorry even that i had said to say  because it was really bad in the past of  my lifetime but anyway maybe we should  just say  it has become more and more obvious how  terrible the situation in turkey is i'm  more comfortable with that than actually  saying it's gotten worse i think things  really were bad before but we had  reasons to kid ourselves about it we  have reasons to have kind of false  optimism okay so if you were living in  turkey now and you spoke turkish  fluently  how are you going to live your life  as a dissident  and as a dissident intellectual what i  have to say to you is that i'm not  seeking out a life of conflict and i've  just narrated for you i'm not even  really seeking out a conflict with  someone like a natural vegan you know  i'm really not  okay  but i am more alienated from my own  society  and i am more alienated  from the other members of the vegan  movement you know  i am more alienated from each of these  social contacts certainly  i am more alienated from the other  youtubers who talk about atheism and  call themselves activists for the  atheist movement i am more alienated  from jacqueline glenn from the amazing  atheist right  i am more alienated from my own culture  than you would be  from the culture of 21st century turkey  so i have to in this way  live my life  in a perpetual state of conflict  whether i bring that to others or others  bring it to me  i don't have a choice  but the choice i do have  is whether the conflict in my life is  going to be meaningful or meaningless  and i can look at a conflict like a  conflict about  the future of psychiatry  the future of prescription drugs for  depression you know and i can say yes  this is a conflict worth having there's  something to win and there's something  to lose and i can commit my time and  energy to it and i can care about the  outcomes of that conflict whether it's  with one person or with a thousand you  know whether it's it's for one person's  life it's to save one person's life and  that's not an exaggeration  and without getting into uh personal  details of what people have known and  the consequences you know whether or not  it's to save just one person's life or  it's to lead the audience through a kind  of political exercise that's going to  impact 100 people's lives a thousand  people's lives ten thousand people's  lives you know and so on i can say yes  yes yes clearly  this is a meaningful conflict  i think it's harder  to commit to the notion  that just reaching out to your own  brother  and letting him know  when things go wrong with you  it hurts me too  don't say it's none of my business  don't say it doesn't harm me that i  don't suffer when you get drunk and you  go gambling  all right  it hurts me it hurts me more than you  know  it hurts me because i care  to find the meaning in that  and to commit to that  as a meaningful conflict i think that is  a test of character  each of you have to examine  in your own hearts  whether or not  you've got what it takes  and when you've examined that  maybe you can look again a little more  charitably  at the type of conflict i had  with richard with vegan gains the type  of conflict i had with mod vegan at the  type of conflict i had with aaron janus  and even if it hurt those people even if  jacqueline glenn  broke down weeping  and responsibilities even if unnatural  vegan felt betrayed and hurt  and shed her tears  over the  criticism i brought to her channel  okay  it is fundamentally about that same  spirit  that same test of character  um  it's meaningful and it matters to me  because i care  and i care that you  are squandering your intellectual  potential  and when you scale that up  it means that we  are squandering  our political potential